Add blog post about CRI-O's seccomp OCI artifact feature (#45121)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-02-29-cri-o-seccomp-oci-artifacts.md

                             node.kubernetes.io/unreachable:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
Events:
  Type     Reason     Age                 From               Message
  ----     ------     ----                ----               -------
  Normal   Scheduled  117s                default-scheduler  Successfully assigned default/pod to 127.0.0.1
  Normal   Pulling    117s                kubelet            Pulling image "nginx:1.25.3"
  Normal   Pulled     111s                kubelet            Successfully pulled image "nginx:1.25.3" in 5.948s (5.948s including waiting)
  Warning  Failed     7s (x10 over 111s)  kubelet            Error: setup seccomp: unable to load local profile "/var/lib/kubelet/seccomp/nginx-1.25.3.json": open /var/lib/kubelet/seccomp/nginx-1.25.3.json: no such file or directory
  Normal   Pulled     7s (x9 over 111s)   kubelet            Container image "nginx:1.25.3" already present on machine
```

The major obstacle of having to manually distribute the profiles will lead many
end-users into using `RuntimeDefault` or even running their workloads as
`Unconfined`.

## CRI-O to the rescue

The Kubernetes container runtime [CRI-O](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o)

> provides various features using custom annotations. The upcoming v1.30 release
> will [add support for a new annotation](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/7719)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provides various features using custom annotations. The v1.30 release
 adds [support for a new annotation](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/7719)
```

called `io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile`. This annotation allows to specify:

- a seccomp profile for a specific container, when used as:
  `io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile/<CONTAINER>`
- a seccomp profile for every container within a pod, when used without the
  container name suffix:
  `io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile`
- a seccomp profile for a whole container image, if the image itself contains

>   the annotation `io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile`

Author: We can still change the annotation because the feature has not been released. Does that mean that something like this would be more feasible:

- `runtime.kubernetes.io/secocmpProfile/<CONTAINER>`
- `seccompProfile.cri-o.kubeneretes.io/<CONTAINER>`

:thinking: 

cc @haircommander

>   the annotation `io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile`

Reviewer 2: I'd go for something like one of:
- `kubernetes.cri-o.io/seccomp-profile-map` (which would be a JSON dict of container names to profile names)
- `kubernetes.cri-o.io/seccomp-profile-FOO` which would be the seccomp profile for a container named `FOO`

These are CRI-O's annotations, AIUI, so the domain would be a CRI-O one. However we might add a more generic `kubernetes.cri-o.io/seccomp-profile-map` annotation and teach the kubelet how to expose that via CRI (future work).

>   the annotation `io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile`

Reviewer 2: I know these are different to existing annotations; all the existing ones are outside what we (Kubernetes) recommend doing.

Downloaded  c15f3eb1efd9 seccomp.tar
Pulled [registry] quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
Digest: sha256:c427d4f703263fbd7dbd607bed902eaf405de5880bf89fc344df5fc0a23f4d2a

> tar xf seccomp.tar

> jq . seccomp.json | head
{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "defaultErrnoRet": 38,
  "defaultErrno": "ENOSYS",
  "archMap": [
    {
      "architecture": "SCMP_ARCH_X86_64",
      "subArchitectures": [
        "SCMP_ARCH_X86",
        "SCMP_ARCH_X32"
```

```
> skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 | jq .
```

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:ca3d163bab055381827226140568f3bef7eaac187cebd76878e0b63e9e442356",
    "size": 3
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:c15f3eb1efd9abe0ae973e050c374988bba52c45a53f5c3cd80419a865013fa6",
      "size": 20480,
      "annotations": {
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "seccomp.tar"
      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2024-02-05T11:37:22Z"
  }
}
```

> We can see that the image itself consists of an empty config

Reviewer 2: We [avoid using “we”](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-using-we); there's an exception for using it to refer to the multiple authors of a blog article, but that doesn't apply here.

(`application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`) and a single layer
(`application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar`) pointing to the `seccomp.tar` file.
Let's give it a try!

### Using the annotation for a specific container or whole pod

CRI-O needs to be configured adequately before it can utilize the annotation. To
do this, add the annotation to the `allowed_annotations` array for the runtime.
This can be done by using a drop-in configuration
`/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/10-crun.conf` like this:

```toml
[crio.runtime]
default_runtime = "crun"

[crio.runtime.runtimes.crun]
allowed_annotations = [
    "io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile",
]
```

Now, let's run CRI-O from the latest `main` commit. This can be done by either
building it from source, using the [static binary bundles](https://github.com/cri-o/packaging?tab=readme-ov-file#using-the-static-binary-bundles-directly)
or [the prerelease packages](https://github.com/cri-o/packaging?tab=readme-ov-file#usage).

> For the demo I just ran the `crio` binary from my command line using a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the demo, I just ran the `crio` binary from my command line using a single
```

Now that the cluster is up and running, let's try a pod without the annotation
running as seccomp `Unconfined`:

```
> cat pod.yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
      securityContext:
        seccompProfile:
          type: Unconfined
```

```
> kubectl apply -f pod.yaml
```

The workload is up and running:

```
> kubectl get pods
NAME   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pod    1/1     Running   0          15s
```

And no seccomp profile got applied if we inspect the container using
[`crictl`](https://sigs.k8s.io/cri-tools):

```
> export CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps --name container -q)

> sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp
null
```

Now, let's modify the pod to apply the profile `quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1` to the
container:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
  annotations:
    io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile/container: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
```

> We have to delete the workload, because only recreation will apply a new seccomp

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I have to delete and recreate the Pod, because only recreation will apply a new seccomp
```

We [avoid using “we”](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-using-we); there's an exception for using it to refer to the multiple authors of a blog article, but that doesn't apply here.

      image: nginx:1.25.3
```

{{< note >}}
CRI-O has an option called `seccomp_use_default_when_empty` (config file) /
`--seccomp-use-default-when-empty` (CLI), which is enabled by default and sets
the `RuntimeDefault` profile if not specified in the pod spec. For testing the
new annotation, either disable it or lookout for the log line: _"Found container
specific seccomp profile annotation"_.
{{< /note >}}

### Using the annotation for a container image

While specifying seccomp profiles as OCI artifacts on certain workloads is a
cool feature, the majority of end users would like to link seccomp profiles to
actual container images. This can be done by using the same annotation, but now
at the container image itself. For example, [Podman](https://podman.io) can be
used to add the annotation directly on image build:

```
> podman build \
    --annotation io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile=quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 \
    -t quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp .
```

The pushed image then contains the annotation:

```
> skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:latest |
    jq '.annotations."io.kubernetes.cri-o.seccompProfile"'
"quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1"
```

> When we now use that image in our CRI-O test pod definition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If I now use that image in an CRI-O test pod definition:
```

We [avoid using “we”](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-using-we); there's an exception for using it to refer to the multiple authors of a blog article, but that doesn't apply here.

needs a `config` with the `mediaType` `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`,
while ORAS uses `application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json` per default. Last but not
least, CRI-O requires a tarball rather than the plain `.json` file. To achieve
all of that, the following commands can be executed:

```
> echo "{}" > config.json

> tar cf seccomp.tar seccomp.json

> oras push \
    --config config.json:application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json \
     quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 seccomp.tar
```

The resulting image contains the right config `mediaType` and pushes a single
layer `seccomp.tar` to the registry. The name of the profile as well as the
tarball does not matter much. CRI-O will pick the first `.json` file from any
OCI artifact and check if that can act as a seccomp profile.

## Future work

CRI-O internally manages the OCI artifacts like regular container images.
This provides the benefit of moving them around, removing them if not used any
more or having any other data available than seccomp profiles. This enables future
enhancements in CRI-O on top of OCI artifacts, but also allows thinking about
stacking seccomp profiles as part of having multiple layers in an OCI artifact.

> The limitation that it only works for `Unconfined` workloads right now is

Reviewer: 'right now' should be replaced with a release version

Author: Yep, done :+1:

> something different we would like to address in the future. Simplifying the

Reviewer 2: eg
```diff
-something different we would like to address in the future. Simplifying the
+something different we (CRI-O maintainers) would like to address in the future. Simplifying the
```

---
layout: blog
title: "CRI-O: Applying seccomp profiles from OCI registries"
date: 2024-02-29
slug: cri-o-seccomp-oci-artifacts
---

**Author:** Sascha Grunert

Distributing seccomp profiles is a major challenge in Kubernetes, because the
JSON files have to be available on all nodes where a workload can possibly run.
Projects like the [Security Profiles Operator](https://sigs.k8s.io/security-profiles-operator)
solve that problem by running as a daemon within the cluster, which makes me
wonder which part of that distribution could be done by the [container
runtime](/docs/setup/production-environment/container-runtimes).

Runtimes usually apply the profiles from a local path, for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
      securityContext:
        seccompProfile:
          type: Localhost
          localhostProfile: nginx-1.25.3.json
```

The profile `nginx-1.25.3.json` has to be available in the root directory of the

> kubelet, appended by the `seccomp` directory. Means the default location for the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
kubelet, appended by the `seccomp` directory. This means the default location for the
```

profile on-disk would be `/var/lib/kubelet/seccomp/nginx-1.25.3.json`. If the
profile is not available, then runtimes will fail on container creation like
this:

```shell
kubectl get pods
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

NAME   READY   STATUS                 RESTARTS   AGE
pod    0/1     CreateContainerError   0          38s
```

```shell
kubectl describe pod/pod | tail
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

Tolerations:                 node.kubernetes.io/not-ready:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
                             node.kubernetes.io/unreachable:NoExecute op=Exists for 300s
Events:
  Type     Reason     Age                 From               Message
  ----     ------     ----                ----               -------
  Normal   Scheduled  117s                default-scheduler  Successfully assigned default/pod to 127.0.0.1
  Normal   Pulling    117s                kubelet            Pulling image "nginx:1.25.3"
  Normal   Pulled     111s                kubelet            Successfully pulled image "nginx:1.25.3" in 5.948s (5.948s including waiting)
  Warning  Failed     7s (x10 over 111s)  kubelet            Error: setup seccomp: unable to load local profile "/var/lib/kubelet/seccomp/nginx-1.25.3.json": open /var/lib/kubelet/seccomp/nginx-1.25.3.json: no such file or directory
  Normal   Pulled     7s (x9 over 111s)   kubelet            Container image "nginx:1.25.3" already present on machine
```

> The major obstacle of having to manually distribute the profiles will lead many

Author: If they don't get distributed by admins, then users cannot use them as type `Localhost`. But they can still use `RuntimeDefault` or `Unconfined`. I'll clarify that by slightly modifying the sentence.

`Unconfined`.

## CRI-O to the rescue

The Kubernetes container runtime [CRI-O](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o)
provides various features using custom annotations. The v1.30 release
adds [support for a new set of annotations](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/7719)
called `/POD` and
`seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/<CONTAINER>`. Those annotations allow to
specify:

- a seccomp profile for a specific container, when used as:
  `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/<CONTAINER>`
- a seccomp profile for every container within a pod, when used without the
  container name suffix but the reserved name `POD`:
  `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD`
- a seccomp profile for a whole container image, if the image itself contains
  the annotation `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD` or
  `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/<CONTAINER>`.

CRI-O will only respect the annotation if the runtime is configured to allow it,
as well as for workloads running as `Unconfined`. All other workloads will still
use the value from the `securityContext` with a higher priority.

The annotations alone will not help much with the distribution of the profiles,

> but the way how they can be referenced will! For example, users can now specify

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but the way they can be referenced will! For example, users can now specify
```

> but the way they can be referenced will! For example, users can now specify

Reviewer 2: (optional / nit)
```suggestion
but the way they can be referenced will! For example, you can now specify
```

seccomp profiles like regular container images by using OCI artifacts:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
  annotations:

>     seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1

Author: That image actually exists and is used for our integration tests. Can we keep it to provide a real image example for readers?

>     seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1

Reviewer 2: Ah, if it's a real artefact then sure. I hadn't realized.

spec: …
```

The image `quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1` contains a `seccomp.tar` tarball, which
contains the actual profile. Tools like [ORAS](https://oras.land) or
[Skopeo](https://github.com/containers/skopeo) can be used to inspect the
contents of the artifact:

```shell
oras pull quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

Downloading c15f3eb1efd9 seccomp.tar
Downloaded  c15f3eb1efd9 seccomp.tar
Pulled [registry] quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
Digest: sha256:c427d4f703263fbd7dbd607bed902eaf405de5880bf89fc344df5fc0a23f4d2a
```

```shell
tar xf seccomp.tar
```

```shell
jq . seccomp.json | head
```

> ```json

Author: Yep, changed as suggested.

{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "defaultErrnoRet": 38,
  "defaultErrno": "ENOSYS",
  "archMap": [
    {
      "architecture": "SCMP_ARCH_X86_64",
      "subArchitectures": [
        "SCMP_ARCH_X86",
        "SCMP_ARCH_X32"
```

```shell

> skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 | jq .

Author: Done :+1:

      }
    }
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.created": "2024-02-05T11:37:22Z"
  }
}
```

The image manifest contains a reference to an empty config
(`application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`) and a single layer
(`application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar`) pointing to the `seccomp.tar` file.
But now, let's give that new feature a try!

### Using the annotation for a specific container or whole pod

CRI-O needs to be configured adequately before it can utilize the annotation. To
do this, add the annotation to the `allowed_annotations` array for the runtime.
This can be done by using a drop-in configuration
`/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/10-crun.conf` like this:

```toml
[crio.runtime]
default_runtime = "crun"

[crio.runtime.runtimes.crun]
allowed_annotations = [
    "seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io",
]
```

Now, let's run CRI-O from the latest `main` commit. This can be done by either
building it from source, using the [static binary bundles](https://github.com/cri-o/packaging?tab=readme-ov-file#using-the-static-binary-bundles-directly)
or [the prerelease packages](https://github.com/cri-o/packaging?tab=readme-ov-file#usage).

> For the demo, I just ran the `crio` binary from my command line using a single

Author: Thank you, fixed as suggested! :+1:

node Kubernetes cluster via [`local-up-cluster.sh`](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o?tab=readme-ov-file#running-kubernetes-with-cri-o).
Now that the cluster is up and running, let's try a pod without the annotation
running as seccomp `Unconfined`:

```shell
cat pod.yaml
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
      securityContext:
        seccompProfile:
          type: Unconfined
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f pod.yaml
```

The workload is up and running:

```shell
kubectl get pods
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

NAME   READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pod    1/1     Running   0          15s
```

And no seccomp profile got applied if I inspect the container using
[`crictl`](https://sigs.k8s.io/cri-tools):

```shell
export CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps --name container -q)
sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

null
```

Now, let's modify the pod to apply the profile `quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1` to the
container:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
  annotations:
    seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/container: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
```

I have to delete and recreate the Pod, because only recreation will apply a new seccomp
profile:

```shell
kubectl delete pod/pod
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

pod "pod" deleted
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f pod.yaml
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

pod/pod created
```

The CRI-O logs will now indicate that the runtime pulled the artifact:

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

WARN[…] Allowed annotations are specified for workload [seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io]
INFO[…] Found container specific seccomp profile annotation: seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/container=quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1  id=26ddcbe6-6efe-414a-88fd-b1ca91979e93 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Pulling OCI artifact from ref: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1  id=26ddcbe6-6efe-414a-88fd-b1ca91979e93 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Trying to read profile from: /var/lib/containers/storage/overlay/c15f3eb1efd9abe0ae973e050c374988bba52c45a53f5c3cd80419a865013fa6/merged/seccomp.json  id=26ddcbe6-6efe-414a-88fd-b1ca91979e93 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Retrieved OCI artifact seccomp profile of len: 18853  id=26ddcbe6-6efe-414a-88fd-b1ca91979e93 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
```

And the container is finally using the profile:

```shell
export CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps --name container -q)
sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp | head
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```json
```

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Weirdly, `yaml` will work better than `json` (and all JSON documents are valid YAML). Consider switching?

Author: Yep, done :+1:

kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
  annotations:
    seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
```

{{< note >}}
CRI-O has an option called `seccomp_use_default_when_empty` (config file) /
`--seccomp-use-default-when-empty` (CLI), which is enabled by default and sets
the `RuntimeDefault` profile if not specified in the pod spec. For testing the
new annotation, either disable it or lookout for the log line: _"Found container
specific seccomp profile annotation"_.
{{< /note >}}

### Using the annotation for a container image

While specifying seccomp profiles as OCI artifacts on certain workloads is a
cool feature, the majority of end users would like to link seccomp profiles to
actual container images. This can be done by using the same annotation, but now
at the container image itself. For example, [Podman](https://podman.io) can be
used to add the annotation directly on image build:

```shell
podman build \
    --annotation seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD=quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 \
    -t quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:pod .
```

The pushed image then contains the annotation:

```shell

> skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:pod |

Reviewer 2: Does this need a `\` continuation?

Author: No, it's valid to omit the `\` when using a pipe.

    jq '.annotations."seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD"'
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

"quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1"
```

If I now use that image in an CRI-O test pod definition:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:pod
```

Then the CRI-O logs will indicate that the annotation got evaluated and the
profile got applied:

```shell
kubectl delete pod/pod
```

```
pod "pod" deleted
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f pod.yaml
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

pod/pod created
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

INFO[…] Found image specific seccomp profile annotation for pod: seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io=quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Pulling OCI artifact from ref: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Trying to read profile from: /var/lib/containers/storage/overlay/c15f3eb1efd9abe0ae973e050c374988bba52c45a53f5c3cd80419a865013fa6/merged/seccomp.json  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Retrieved OCI artifact seccomp profile of len: 18853  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Created container 116a316cd9a11fe861dd04c43b94f45046d1ff37e2ed05a4e4194fcaab29ee63: default/pod/container  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
```

```shell
export CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps --name container -q)
sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp | head
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```json
```

{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "defaultErrnoRet": 38,
  "architectures": [
    "SCMP_ARCH_X86_64",
    "SCMP_ARCH_X86",
    "SCMP_ARCH_X32"
  ],
  "syscalls": [
    {
```

The whole feature also works when using the container specific annotation on an

> image, for example if a container is named `container1`:

Reviewer 2: - OCI image annotations aren't supposed to contain a `/` (the rules are different from Kubernetes annotations).
- How would the image author know what the container running it might be named?

Author: > How would the image author know what the container running it might be named?

I would not leave out that use case since it seems to be possible in small environments that the author of the pod manifest is also the image creator. But I agree this might be a rare case.

> OCI image annotations aren't supposed to contain a / (the rules are different from Kubernetes annotations).

I'm not sure if we should change the behavior for images and only allow the annotation `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io`. Should we? Would it be more confusing to end users?

```shell

> skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:container |

Reviewer 2: Does this need a `\` continuation?

Author: No, it's valid to omit the \ when using a pipe.

    jq '.annotations."seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/container1"'
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```txt
```

while ORAS uses `application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json` per default. Last but not
least, CRI-O requires a tarball rather than the plain `.json` file. To achieve
all of that, the following commands can be executed:

```shell
echo "{}" > config.json
tar cf seccomp.tar seccomp.json
oras push \
    --config config.json:application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json \
     quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 seccomp.tar
```

The resulting image contains the right config `mediaType` and pushes a single
layer `seccomp.tar` to the registry. The name of the profile as well as the
tarball does not matter much. CRI-O will pick the first `.json` file from any
OCI artifact and check if that can act as a seccomp profile.

## Future work

CRI-O internally manages the OCI artifacts like regular container images.
This provides the benefit of moving them around, removing them if not used any
more or having any other data available than seccomp profiles. This enables future
enhancements in CRI-O on top of OCI artifacts, but also allows thinking about
stacking seccomp profiles as part of having multiple layers in an OCI artifact.
The limitation that it only works for `Unconfined` workloads for v1.30.x

> releases is something different CRI-O would like to address in the future.

Author: Yep, thank you I'll remove it.

- a seccomp profile for every container within a pod, when used without the
  container name suffix but the reserved name `POD`:
  `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD`
- a seccomp profile for a whole container image, if the image itself contains
  the annotation `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD` or
  `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/<CONTAINER>`.

CRI-O will only respect the annotation if the runtime is configured to allow it,
as well as for workloads running as `Unconfined`. All other workloads will still
use the value from the `securityContext` with a higher priority.

The annotations alone will not help much with the distribution of the profiles,
but the way they can be referenced will! For example, you can now specify
seccomp profiles like regular container images by using OCI artifacts:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
  annotations:
    seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
spec: …
```

The image `quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1` contains a `seccomp.tar` tarball, which
contains the actual profile. Tools like [ORAS](https://oras.land) or
[Skopeo](https://github.com/containers/skopeo) can be used to inspect the

> contents of the artifact:

Reviewer 2: Is this:
- an OCI image and therefore also an OCI object
- an OCI object, but not actually a container image
- a prototype for a future approach that will be different from the prototype?

I'd like to make that clear to readers, too.

Author: It's basically just an image, I'm going to refer to that.

```

```yaml
{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "defaultErrnoRet": 38,
  "architectures": [
    "SCMP_ARCH_X86_64",
    "SCMP_ARCH_X86",
    "SCMP_ARCH_X32"
  ],
  "syscalls": [
    {
```

The same would work for every container in the pod, if users replace the
`/container` suffix with the reserved name `/POD`, for example:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: pod
  annotations:
    seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD: quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1
spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: nginx:1.25.3
```

{{< note >}}
CRI-O has an option called `seccomp_use_default_when_empty` (config file) /
`--seccomp-use-default-when-empty` (CLI), which is enabled by default and sets
the `RuntimeDefault` profile if not specified in the pod spec. For testing the
new annotation, either disable it or lookout for the log line: _"Found container
specific seccomp profile annotation"_.
{{< /note >}}

### Using the annotation for a container image

While specifying seccomp profiles as OCI artifacts on certain workloads is a
cool feature, the majority of end users would like to link seccomp profiles to

> actual container images. This can be done by using the same annotation, but now

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
published container images. This can be done by using a container image annotation; instead
of being applied to a Kubernetes Pod, the annotation is some metadata applied
```
?

at the container image itself. For example, [Podman](https://podman.io) can be

> used to add the annotation directly on image build:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
used to add the image annotation directly during image build:
```
(verbose as this is almost tech docs)

```shell
podman build \
    --annotation seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io=quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 \
    -t quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:generic .
```

The pushed image then contains the annotation:

```shell
skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:generic |
    jq '.annotations."seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io"'
```

```console
"quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1"
```

If I now use that image in an CRI-O test pod definition:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:

>   name: pod

Reviewer 2: How about:
```suggestion
  name: pod
  # no Pod annotations set
```

spec:
  containers:
    - name: container
      image: quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:generic
```

> Then the CRI-O logs will indicate that the annotation got evaluated and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then the CRI-O logs will indicate that the image annotation got evaluated and the
```

    jq '.annotations."seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/container1"'
```

```console
"quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1"
```

The cool thing about this whole feature is that users can now create seccomp
profiles for specific container images and store them side by side in the same
registry. Linking the images to the profiles provides a great flexibility to
maintain both over the whole application's life cycle.

### Pushing profiles using ORAS

The actual creation of the profiles requires a bit more prework, but I have the
hope that future tools will simplify the overall process. Right now, the
container registry needs to be [ORAS
compatible](https://oras.land/docs/compatible_oci_registries/#registries-supporting-oci-artifacts),
which is also (partially) the case for [Quay.io](https://quay.io). CRI-O also
needs a `config` with the `mediaType` `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`,
while ORAS uses `application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json` per default. Last but not
least, CRI-O requires a tarball rather than the plain `.json` file. To achieve
all of that, the following commands can be executed:

```shell
echo "{}" > config.json
tar cf seccomp.tar seccomp.json
oras push \

>     --config config.json:application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json \

Reviewer 2: Is this use of `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`:
- the final design?
- a prototype for a future approach that will be different from the prototype?

I'd like to make that clear to readers, too.

For example, Helm uses `application/vnd.cncf.helm.config.v1+json` with `application/vnd.cncf.helm.chart.content.v1.tar+gzip` layers.

Author: For ORAS it would be the final design (for v1.30). I expect support for artifacts in Podman in the future which could then simplify things.

Reviewer 2: :grimacing: 

I'm not a fan; getting a dedicated media type assigned feels like the obvious right approach (so that you can tell a seccomp profile apart from a container image).

There's also the precedent it sets: encouraging other projects to further use the container image media type for other things that you can't actually execute with `podman run`. Should we, Kubernetes, be promoting this kind of misunderstanding - even indirectly?

---

If we cast this as an _experiment_, all my qualms about the approach fall away. Experiments are fine to cut corners and readers would be unwise to treat them as good practice.

Reviewer 2: (eg, media type is not really assigned)
```shell
    --config config.json:application/vnd.cncf.seccomp-profile.config.v1+json \
```

Author: Generally SGTM, but I'm not sure if we can merge / resolve that until next week in https://github.com/containers/image/pull/2306. Would you be fine in mentioning that work and outlining the future path?

Reviewer 2: Pretty much yes. You could:
- frame this as experimental / incomplete support
- explain that the media type thing is likely to change
- extend the “future steps” part of the article to explain the likely journey specifically around media types and ORAS

or pick multiple items from the above.

Reviewer 2: :cool:

...but, the object still has _some_ media type, right? Happy to have a call about the approach here, both in terms of the CRI-O level and how to follow the OCI good practice, or about how to caveat any remaining gaps.

Author: Ah yes we still enforce the media type `application/vnd.cncf.seccomp-profile.config.v1+json`.

Author: See https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/45121#issuecomment-1966071714

---
layout: blog
title: "CRI-O: Applying seccomp profiles from OCI registries"

> date: 2024-02-29

Reviewer 2: We should be OK to go for this date. There are some bits I want to get right around what we communicate - there are what felt to me like a few design snags.

See the overall comment in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/45121#pullrequestreview-1890388459 to cover my take on this. TL;DR: we can describe snags or encourage a fix, but we ought to do at least one of those per snag.

INFO[…] Retrieved OCI artifact seccomp profile of len: 18853  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
INFO[…] Created container 116a316cd9a11fe861dd04c43b94f45046d1ff37e2ed05a4e4194fcaab29ee63: default/pod/container  id=c1f22c59-e30e-4046-931d-a0c0fdc2c8b7 name=/runtime.v1.RuntimeService/CreateContainer
```

```shell
export CONTAINER_ID=$(sudo crictl ps --name container -q)
sudo crictl inspect $CONTAINER_ID | jq .info.runtimeSpec.linux.seccomp | head
```

```yaml
{
  "defaultAction": "SCMP_ACT_ERRNO",
  "defaultErrnoRet": 38,
  "architectures": [
    "SCMP_ARCH_X86_64",
    "SCMP_ARCH_X86",
    "SCMP_ARCH_X32"
  ],
  "syscalls": [
    {
```

For container images, the annotation `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io` will
be treated in the same way as `seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/POD` and
applies to the whole pod. In addition to that, the whole feature also works when
using the container specific annotation on an image, for example if a container

> is named `container1`:

Reviewer 2: There's a risk of confusion: we're talking about two things that are both called container images:
- container images that you can run with kubectl exec
- seccomp profiles that are bundled into container images that you can't run, but marked with metadata to suggest you could

A reader might not know which use you mean here. I genuinely think that assigning a media type to these OCI objects containing seccomp profiles would be the easy path here.

Author: That's the plan. Resolving this discussion now.

```shell
skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/crio/nginx-seccomp:container |
    jq '.annotations."seccomp-profile.kubernetes.cri-o.io/container1"'
```

```console
"quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1"
```

The cool thing about this whole feature is that users can now create seccomp
profiles for specific container images and store them side by side in the same

> registry. Linking the images to the profiles provides a great flexibility to

Reviewer 2: (eg)
```suggestion
registry. For now, CRI-O's seccomp integration is treating those the seccomp profiles as container
images (they don't have a dedicated media type assigned). Linking the images to the profiles provides
a great flexibility to maintain both over the whole application's life cycle.
```
```

maintain both over the whole application's life cycle.

### Pushing profiles using ORAS

> The actual creation of the profiles requires a bit more prework when using ORAS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The actual creation of the OCI object that contains a seccomp profile requires a bit more work when using ORAS.
```

(BTW, OCI objects were previously called OCI Artifacts)

I have the hope that tools like Podman will simplify the overall process in the
future. Right now, the container registry needs to be

> [ORAS compatible](https://oras.land/docs/compatible_oci_registries/#registries-supporting-oci-artifacts),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[OCI compatible](https://oras.land/docs/compatible_oci_registries/#registries-supporting-oci-artifacts),
```

> which is also (partially) the case for [Quay.io](https://quay.io). CRI-O also
> needs a `config` with the `mediaType` `application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is also (partially) the case for [Quay.io](https://quay.io). CRI-O expects
the seccomp profile object to have a container image media type
(`application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json`),
```

while ORAS uses `application/vnd.oci.empty.v1+json` per default. Last but not

> least, CRI-O requires a tarball rather than the plain `.json` file. To achieve

Reviewer 2: if I've understood correctly, it's the [OCI image spec](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/spec.md) that requires tar, or gzipped tar as the format of a layer (and then CRI-O's technical choice to use container images for seccomp profile distribution implies that the image has to follow the spec for images).

```suggestion
least, the OCI format for container images requires that the profile (in JSON) is encoded as a
tar-fomat container image layer. To achieve
```

[If CRI-O or some other project used a dedicated format for distributing the profiles as OCI objects, there wouldn't be any need for using tar here.]

all of that, the following commands can be executed:

```shell
echo "{}" > config.json
tar cf seccomp.tar seccomp.json
oras push \
    --config config.json:application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json \
     quay.io/crio/seccomp:v1 seccomp.tar
```

> The resulting image contains the right config `mediaType` and pushes a single

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resulting image contains the `mediaType` that CRI-O expects. ORAS pushes a single
```
